The world is going through rapid changes, and the only constant thing that is in our hands is our health. Being healthy is a choice. Specific guidelines are there to maintain good health, but in the end, it is individual effort and determination. Good health is essential for having a pro-active and fully functioning life. Man is a social animal, and good health ensures social survival. Health, besides being personal, is also social. A healthy person can bring positive changes in society. It is not an end to itself but also the key to creating a better and more reformed community.
Health can be of varied types; physical, emotional, mental, social, spiritual, and sexual health is some of them. Distress can cause neurotic disorders, and healthy people are less likely to fall prey to them. Physical health refers to the bodily well-being of individuals. It involves maintaining a healthy lifestyle. An individual who follows a balanced diet, replenished with carbohydrates, proteins, fats, vitamins, and minerals, in adequate quantities, usually has better immunity. Health is Wealth means good health is the real treasure. A healthy life enables one to remain positive and face all life challenges.
Physical health requires few dedicated efforts, including regular exercise and consumption of a lot of water. Water regulates all our body processes, reduces chances for zits and pimples, and ensures regular bowel movements. Exercises like brisk walking, running, cycling, and skipping help in maintaining proper body weight.
Even if an individual has specific issues like heart diseases, he must know the required guidelines. The guidelines involve not eating very oily food, avoiding junk food, and so on. A diabetic person must adhere to the doctor’s instructions and consume minimum sugar. Children should eat more proteins as they are body-building nutrients. Physical health is essential for a long and pleasant lifespan.
Mental health refers to our emotional and psychological well-being. Mental health has a significant impact on our thoughts, behaviors, and attitude. It is essential to give equal attention to our mental health as its effects are grave. Society has a significant impact on an individual’s mental health. Societal pressures about getting jobs and getting significantly married affect our peace of mind. In addition to false standards of beauty imposed on us, harmful and hurtful remarks regarding someone’s body and various unnecessary criticisms take a toll on our mental health.
Teenagers are very susceptible to depression and anxiety as they go through the troubled adolescent period. Adults expect them to take up responsibilities all of a sudden, and they cannot cope up with their expectations. Hence, they suffer from an identity crisis as they cannot comprehend the roles that they should play.
Adolescents often fall under peer pressure and take to bad habits like drugs, alcohol, which makes them unfocused. Retired individuals also suffer from loneliness and depression as they feel that they have lost their prominence in the family. Heavy workload and pressure to meet deadlines, merged with an unhealthy workplace environment may also affect mental health.
It is essential to create a positive environment around yourself to counter the negativity. Cutting off toxic people is the right way of having better mental health. Above everything, we must choose happiness and optimism as the guiding principles of our life.